Add percentiles to SQL patterns in the docs (#16674) (#17275)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/user/content/sql/patterns/percentiles.md

---
title: "Tracking percentiles"

> description: "How to efficiently track percentiles in Materialize."

Reviewer: For consistency (although the naming and organization of the SQL pattern section is all over the place right now).

menu:
  main:
    parent: 'sql-patterns'
---

Percentiles are often used to understand and interpret data. Informally speaking, the k-th percentile is the value such that k percent of all values are lower than the percentile.

> A naive way to compute percentiles is to simply order all values and pick the value at the position of the corresponding percentile. This can be easily expressed in Materialize through `order by`, `offset`, and `limit`. But this way of computing percentiles keeps all values around and therefore requires memory that linearly grows with the number of values that are tracked. There are better suited alternatives that reduce the required memory footprint, two of which are explained below: histograms and High Dynamic Range (HDR) histograms.

Author: I've cleaned up the intro a bit. But I did not remove it entirely because I feel like it adds additional context that makes it easier for people to choose between histograms (more memory but precise) and hdr histograms (potentially less memory but an approximation).

> Histograms have a reduced memory footprint that is linear in the number of *unique* values while they are still computing precise percentiles. HDR histograms further reduce the memory footprint at the expense of returning approximate percentiles only. They are particularly interesting if there is a long tail of large values that you want to track, which is often the case for latency meassurements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Histograms have a reduced memory footprint that is linear in the number of *unique* values while they are still computing precise percentiles. HDR histograms further reduce the memory footprint at the expense of returning approximate percentiles only. They are particularly interesting if there is a long tail of large values that you want to track, which is often the case for latency measurements.
```

## Using histograms to compute percentiles

> Histograms reduce the required memory by tracking a count for each unique value instead of tracking all values. Given an `input` table or view, the historgram for `values` is defined as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Histograms reduce the required memory by tracking a count for each unique value instead of tracking all values. Given an `input` table or view, the histogram for `values` is defined as follows:
```

```
CREATE VIEW histogram AS
SELECT
  value AS bucket,
  count(*) AS frequency
FROM input
GROUP BY value;
```

To query percentiles from that view, it's no longer possible to just order the `values` and pick a value from the right spot. Instead, the distribution of values needs to be reconstructed by determining the cumulative count (the sum of counts up through each bucket that came before) for each `bucket`. This is accomplished through a cross join the following view:

```
CREATE VIEW distribution AS
SELECT
  h.bucket,
  h.frequency,
  sum(g.frequency) AS cumulative_count,
  sum(g.frequency) / (SELECT sum(frequency) FROM histogram) AS cumulative_distribution
FROM histogram g, histogram h
WHERE g.bucket <= h.bucket
GROUP BY h.bucket, h.frequency
ORDER BY cumulative_distribution;
```

The cumulative count and the cumulative distribution can then be used to query for arbitrary percentiles. The following query returns the 90-th percentile.

```
SELECT bucket AS percentile
FROM distribution
WHERE cumulative_distribution >= 0.9
ORDER BY cumulative_distribution
LIMIT 1;
```

> To increase query performance, it can make sense to keep the `distribution` in memory by creating an index on the view:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To increase query performance, it can make sense to keep the `distribution` always up to date in memory by creating an index on the view:
```

```
CREATE INDEX distribution_idx ON distribution (cumulative_distribution);
```

Histograms work well for a domain with low cardinality. But note the cross join in the definition of `distribution`. As a consequence, the required memory grows quadratic in the number of unique values and may therefore grow large if the domain has many unique values.

## Using HDR histograms to compute approximate percentiles

> HDR histograms can be used to approximate percentiles in a space efficient manner that scales well even for large domains with many distinct values. HDR histograms basically reduce the precision of values that are tracked and use buckets with variable width. Buckets that are closer to 0 are smaller whereas buckets far away from 0 are wider. This works particularly well for data that exhibits a long tail of large values, e.g. latency measurements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HDR histograms can be used to approximate percentiles in a space efficient manner that scales well even for large domains with many distinct values. HDR histograms reduce the precision of values that are tracked and use buckets with variable width. Buckets closer to 0 are smaller, whereas buckets far away from 0 are wider. This works particularly well for data that exhibits a long tail of large values, e.g., latency measurements.
```

> HDR histograms are related to how floating point numbers are represented as integers. The underlying assumption is that smaller numbers require a higher precision to be distinguishable (e.g. 5 ms and 6 ms are different and should be in different bucket) whereas larger numbers can be rounded more aggressively as their relative error becomes less relevant (e.g. 10000 ms and 10001 ms are basically the same and can reside in the same bucket).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HDR histograms are related to how floating point numbers are represented as integers. The underlying assumption is that smaller numbers require a higher precision to be distinguishable (e.g. 5 ms and 6 ms are different and should be in different buckets), whereas larger numbers can be rounded more aggressively as their relative error becomes less relevant (e.g. 10000 ms and 10001 ms are almost the same and can reside in the same bucket).
```

> In the following, the precision of numbers is reduced to limit the number of required buckets using the underlying approach of HDR histograms and floating point number representation. Numbers are decomposed into their floating point representation

Reviewer 3: _In the following_.. _formula_ or _snippet_?

	n = sign * mantissa * 2**exponent

and the precision of the mantissa is then reduced to compute the respective bucket.

> The basic ideas of using histograms to compute percentiles remains the same, though. Merely the bucket becomes more complicated because it’s now composed of the triple (sign, mantissa, exponent).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The basic ideas of using histograms to compute percentiles remain the same; but determining the bucket becomes harder, it’s now composed of three values (sign, mantissa, exponent):
```

```
-- precision for the representation of the mantissa in bits
\set precision 4

CREATE VIEW hdr_histogram AS
SELECT
  CASE WHEN value<0 THEN -1 ELSE 1 END AS sign,
  trunc(log(2.0, abs(value)))::int AS exponent,
  trunc(pow(2.0, :precision) * (value / pow(2.0, trunc(log(2.0, abs(value)))::int) - 1.0))::int AS mantissa,
  count(*) AS frequency
FROM input
GROUP BY sign, exponent, mantissa;
```

> The `hdr_distribution` view below reconstructs the `bucket` (with reduced precision) and determines the cumulative count and cumulative distribution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `hdr_distribution` view below reconstructs the `bucket` (with reduced precision), and determines the cumulative count and cumulative distribution.
```

```
CREATE VIEW hdr_distribution AS
SELECT
  h.sign*(1.0+h.mantissa/pow(2.0, :precision))*pow(2.0,h.exponent) AS bucket,
  h.frequency,
  sum(g.frequency) AS cumulative_count,
  sum(g.frequency) / (SELECT sum(frequency) FROM hdr_histogram) AS cumulative_distribution
FROM hdr_histogram g, hdr_histogram h
WHERE (g.sign,g.exponent,g.mantissa) <= (h.sign,h.exponent,h.mantissa)
GROUP BY h.sign, h.exponent, h.mantissa, h.frequency
ORDER BY 1;
```

This view can then be used to query *approximate* percentiles. More precisely, the query returns the lower bound for the percentile (the next larger bucket represents the upper bound).

```
SELECT bucket AS approximate_percentile
FROM hdr_distribution
WHERE cumulative_distribution >= 0.9
ORDER BY cumulative_distribution
LIMIT 1;
```

> As before, query performance can be increased by creating an index on `distribution`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As with histograms, increase query performance by creating an index on the `cumulative_distribution` column.
```

```

For small numbers, `distribution` and `hdr_distribution` are identical. All numbers from 1 to 10 are stored in their own buckets.

```
SELECT * FROM hdr_distribution;
 bucket | frequency | cumulative_count | cumulative_distribution
--------+-----------+------------------+-------------------------
      1 |         1 |                1 |                     0.1
      2 |         1 |                2 |                     0.2
      3 |         1 |                3 |                     0.3
      4 |         1 |                4 |                     0.4
      5 |         1 |                5 |                     0.5
      6 |         1 |                6 |                     0.6
      7 |         1 |                7 |                     0.7
      8 |         1 |                8 |                     0.8
      9 |         1 |                9 |                     0.9
     10 |         1 |               10 |                       1
(10 rows)
```

But if values grow larger, buckets can contain more than one value. Let's see what happens if more values are added to the `input` table.

```
INSERT INTO input SELECT n FROM generate_series(11,10001) AS n;
```

> In case of the `hdr_distribution`, a single bucket represents up to 512 distinct values whereas each bucket of the `distribution` contains only a single value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the case of the `hdr_distribution`, a single bucket represents up to 512 distinct values, whereas each bucket of the `distribution` contains only a single value.
```

...skipping...
   7424 |       256 |             7679 | 0.767823217678232176782321767823217678232
   7680 |       256 |             7935 | 0.793420657934206579342065793420657934207
   7936 |       256 |             8191 | 0.819018098190180981901809819018098190181
   8192 |       512 |             8703 |  0.87021297870212978702129787021297870213
   8704 |       512 |             9215 | 0.921407859214078592140785921407859214079
   9216 |       512 |             9727 | 0.972602739726027397260273972602739726027
   9728 |       274 |            10001 |                                         1
(163 rows)
```

Note that `hdr_distribution` only contains 163 rows as opposed to the 10001 rows of `distribution`, which is used in the historgam approch. However, when querying for the 90-th percentils, the query returns an approximate percentile of `8704` whereas the precise percentile is `9001`.

```
SELECT bucket AS approximate_percentile
FROM hdr_distribution
WHERE cumulative_distribution >= 0.9
ORDER BY cumulative_distribution
LIMIT 1;

 approximate_percentile
------------------------
                   8704
(1 row)
```

> The precision of the approximation can be adapted by changing the `precision` in the defiintion of `hdr_histogram`. A higher the `precision` the closer is the value to the actual percentile. The lower the `precision` the less memory is required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The precision of the approximation can be adapted by changing the `precision` in the definition of `hdr_histogram`. The higher the `precision` the closer is the value to the actual percentile. The lower the `precision`, the less memory is required.
```
